prepping yourself to look fine in
ancient Rome isn't as different to now
as you might think
beauty back then was as relevant as it
is now but what was deemed attractive
back then and would you have been a
beauty would any of us so while I'm
getting ready let's talk about how the
Romans would do it among the things that
matter to Romans were blusher eyeliner
perfume and face masks face masks were
big maybe even bigger than they are now
but you wouldn't find a charcoal and
collagen mask in Rome BC instead
crocodile dung was all the rage if he
could afford it and the commonly our
belief was that it could permanently
lighten your skin and the use of
crocodile dung didn't originate in Rome
apparently the ancient Egyptians were
using crocodile dung in their mud baths
way before the Romans cottoned onto the
trend let's start with the base the
complexion Romans used base makeup like
how we use foundation but there's had
ingredients like chalk powder and white
lid white lid was effective and widely
used but it also caused lead poisoning
which led to hair loss infertility
damage to your central nervous system
and organs and ironically skin damage
it's actually lead carbonate a compound
and complex salt containing carbonate
and hydroxide ions
you see lead is absorbed into the body
over time and stored in our blood bones
tissue and teeth our bodies absorb it
like it's calcium
although lead has none of the same
benefits in fact high concentration of
lead in our bodies can lead to lead
poisoning which affects the brain and
nervous system by breaking down the
communications between nerve cells
muscles and hormones that calcium
usually performs so I think we'll put
the lead to bed
I'll stick with setting powder for now
so you've got your base done now it's
time to get those rosy cheeks blushes
and ancient Rome were popular and there
was a wide selection available
but this wasn't like choosing between
cream and powder you had to use wildly
different substances what you used to
read in your cheeks was based on what
you could afford and oddly the more
price of your selection the more likely
it was to poison you wealthy Roman women
applied either Vermillion red to their
cheeks a pigment made by breaking down
the mineral cinnabar or they used red
led cinnabar is a mineral comprised of
toxic mercury sulfide and red LED is
also known as lead oxide both of these
are poisonous substances and they were
known to be at the time but they stayed
on trend because they were rare
effective and exotic if you were a bit
low on money you had other options the
non-toxic red ochre was a possibility if
you were really strapped for cash
however you could always use the dregs
of your wine mixed with mulberries I
might have to remember that one in the
art of beauty written between 1 BC and 8
ad the poet Ovid wrote I have seen a
woman pound up poppies soaked in cold
water and rub her cheeks with them so
it's all starting to come together
we've got our foundation and we've done
our cheeks so what's next it's time to
frame the windows to the soul
eyeliner was a sign of beauty adopted
from ancient Egypt the substance widely
used was called coal which is a
substance made by breaking down coal
stone also known as Galena
go Galena gag and Galena
well this was another lead-based
compound a coal liner like this one is
still used today in ancient Egypt
Cleopatra and even her servants were
wearing eyeliner even the men now for
the hair fashionable hairstyles changed
often having a complicated hairstyle was
popular for the same reason as having
pale skin it demonstrated that you had
enough time to do your hair coveted
styles usually involved a mix of braids
knots and ringlets and were held up
using ornate pins comprising jewels gold
and ivory wealthy Roman women even had
their own personal hair
jessa but she was a slave called
ornatrix her dying was as common as is
today after the conquest of Gaul a
country that comprised France Luxembourg
Belgium and parts of Germany blonde hair
became popular before that darker hair
was desired for darker daya's
the combination included boiled walnuts
charred eggs leeks and leeches this was
left to ferment fermented leech juice
was nothing compared to what you had to
do to dye your hair blonde for that your
hair was covered in pigeon poo or doused
in urine the ammonia acted as a bleach
which made the whole process practical
as well as thoroughly disgusting as ever
there was an alternative option for the
rich if you were wealthy enough you
could literally sprinkle gold into your
hair
talk about flashing the cash henna a
natural dye that is still used today was
also an option open to you for darker
hues as a citizen of ancient Rome it
works by penetrating your hairs cuticles
and into the cortex layer where the
hairs color is formed since it lasts for
a long time this would be the ideal
choice for any citizen concerned about
hair care men were also concerned about
their hair especially if they were
losing it a full head of hair was linked
to vitality in his play the twelve
Caesars historian described the emperor
Domitian
as having the despicable of baldness
however there was one group in ancient
Rome who managed to sidestep this bull
training become a philosopher and
baldness is no longer a sign of lost
vitality but a clear indicator that you
have a lot to say and you have dedicated
yourself to Rome so you've got the look
but have you got the smell perfume was
definitely a part of Roman life in fact
the term was coined by them perfume
which means through smoke used in
worship at temples and at home having a
good owner was linked to having good
health archaeological evidence supports
that it was used throughout the Roman
Empire and used a wide array of
ingredients including rose water saffron
and lilies there were even celebrity
brands
with the sweat of famous gladiators
being scraped off the skin and sold
outside arenas so if you wanted to be
considered a beauty in ancient Rome
you'd better be prepared to satisfy the
time you'd need to have a pale
unblemished face which was achieved by
layering on creams that would poison you
you'd also need to have rosy cheeks by
using a blusher that would also poison
you and in a shocking twist eyeliner
which could also poison you your hair
would not only need to be the latest
style but also whatever shade is on
trend and well if that poisons you
something's gone very wrong most
importantly you need to put in a lot of
work to make it look like you've done
barely anything at all sound familiar
strictly defined the definition of
what's considered beautiful still
lingers it is simply morphed into a
different list of desired traits but as
the definition so nearly goes Rome and
better definitions of beauty were not
built in a day
you